###### ICS3U Front End Dev - Mr. Brash  🐿️

# 1.2 - Basic HTML

Table of Contents
- The Lesson
- [Proper Structure of an HTML file](#proper-structure-of-an-html-file)
- [Common HTML Tags](#tags)
- [Your Task](#your-task)

<br>

---

🤔 What's the difference between **[the Internet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Internet)** and **[the World Wide Web](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_Wide_Web)**?
  - Does Snapchat use the "web"?
  - How about multiplayer games like Fortnite?

If you're still confused (or miss class), here is a selection of videos that explain the differences:
- [MIT Museum Explanation](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UVkT59PmRdo)
- [TED-Ed](https://youtu.be/J8hzJxb0rpc) (good & approx. 5mins)
- [TechQuickie](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=laepk9KrAZY) (Linus Sebastien)
- [Code.org](https://youtu.be/kBXQZMmiA4s)
- [TechCave](https://youtu.be/CX_HyY3kbZw)

## 📖 Programming vs. Designing

A **G**raphical **U**ser **I**nterface (aka **GUI** - "gooey") provides nice interactions:  images, buttons, scrollbars, windows... and it's so pretty! To create a useful GUI, we need to be designers. This skill is called front-end development.

On the "**Web**", the **GUI** is a web page (document) created with **HTML** - **H**yper**T**ext **M**arkup **L**anguage. Here's a selection of videos:
- [A 33 second description](https://youtu.be/xKuJrmlCdig)
  - [A fantastic 46 second follow-up](https://youtu.be/rOPKC49gTkk)
- [What is HTML](https://youtu.be/CKlh1lwe2rY?t=16) (slow but good)
- [A Quicker Explanation](https://youtu.be/W-6OY9eI3hk?t=73) (short and sweet)

Written Definitions:
- [HTML](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTML)
  - [Fantastic article for "What is HTML"](https://www.hostinger.com/tutorials/what-is-html)

## 📖 Graphical User Interface - GUI
- The **front-end** is the screen the user sees. It is created by _defining_ or _declaring_ what to show and how it should look.
- The **back-end** is any code we write to make the program feel _interactive_. When the user clicks or interacts with the front-end, the back-end does the work to _react_.

A web page (**HTML** document) is a graphical way of interacting with data (think Photoshop, Files, Spotify, etc). It has _content_ (text or pictures) and _interactivity_ (buttons, sliders, boxes). In fact, many apps on your phone or computer are actually web-pages because it's so easy to make a nice-looking interface with HTML.

### A GUI (document / page / app screen) has two major sections:

1. **The HEAD**. This is an invisible section that tells the web-browser or operating system specific instructions like the size of the window, if the scroll bars should be visible, the icon or title of the window, the language to display, etc... The user does not see this section.
2. **The BODY**. This is the actual page content that the _user_ will see and interact with.

#### HTML Has those as well.

## Proper Structure of an HTML file:

Let's take a look at a blank (empty) HTML document:
```HTML
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html>

  <head>
    <title> </title>
  </head>

  <body>

  </body>
  
</html>
```
⬆️ That should be the basic structure of _every_ HTML file you create.

## Tags

The items you see inside `<`arrow-brackets`>` are called **Tags**. They are a _declaration_ or _definition_ of a section or _thing_ on the document. **Let's break it down:**
```HTML
<!DOCTYPE html>   This tells the interpreter or browser that it should expect HTML tags.
```
```HTML
<html>  
        This is an opening tag to say "We are starting the actual HTML now".
        It should surround the <head> and <body> but not the <!DOCTYPE html> tags.
</html>
```
```HTML
<head>
        These are the start and stop (open and close) tags for the HEAD section of the page.
        Anything between these tags will live in the hidden section of the page.
        The browser application looks here for instructions or special codes that the user doesn't see.
</head>
```
```HTML
<title>
        The title tag only belongs in the head. It tells the browser what text to place on the tab.
</title>
```
```HTML
<body>
        These are the open and close tags for the BODY section of the page.
        All content for the user to see will go between these tags.
</body>
```
```HTML
</html> This is the closing tag to say "Our page is complete."
```
```HTML
<p> 
        The paragraph tags help space-out and format entire paragraphs of text.
        They automatically insert a blank line between them.
</p>
```
```HTML
<br>    The breakline tag is a single command to end a line and begin a new one.
```
```HTML
There are several other tags for simple text manipulation like bold and italics.

<b> </b>
<strong> </strong>
<i> </i>
<em> </em> 
```

# Your Task:

You are going to make _two_ HTML files:
1. **_Every_** web server defaults the first page you see as `index.html`. If you haven't done so already, create a file called `index.html` inside your main folder in VS Code (make sure it's not in a subfolder). This file needs the [proper structure of an HTML file](#html-has-those-as-well).
    - Title this page "Main Index"
    - The first line of text on this page should be **bold** and say "Welcome to my first webpage!"
    - There should be a blank line
    - Place the text "About Me"
    - On a new line place the text "My Unit 1 Mid-Chapter Assessment"

2. Create a new HTML document and name it `about_me.html` (notice the spelling of that filename).
    - The title of this document should be "About {your name}" where {your name} is _your_ name.
    - The first line of this page should be **bold** and say "About {your name}"
    - There should be a blank line
    - Use at least _two_ paragraph tags to write quick summary about you. Where are you from? When were you born? What are your hobbies or what do you want to do after highschool or after post-secondary school? Feel free to use styling tags like **bold** or *emphasis*.
    - There should be a blank line after your final paragraph.
    - Place the text "Back to Main Index"

You can preview each of your pages by simply right-clicking the filename and selecting "Open with Live Server". If you have **any** questions, ask a classmate and/or your teacher.


🐿️

---
<table style="width: 100%;">
  <tr>
    <td align="left"><a href="1.0 - README (ToC).md">Table of contents</a></td>
    <td align="right"><a href="1.3 - Mode HTML.md">1.3 - More HTML</a></td>
  </tr>
</table>
