###### ICS3U U2: JavaScript - Mr. Brash 🐿️

# 2.1 - Output & The Console

### Front-End vs. Back-End

- **HTML** is the _front-end_ of a program. It is what the user sees and interacts with. It is not a programming language.
  - **📄 The document is what the user sees.**

- **JavaScript** is the _back-end_ code used to control the flow of data and interaction with the user.
  - **JavaScript has a developer console that the user typically does not see.**

### Commands (functions) in Code

A `command` in code - also called a `function` or `procedure` - always has parentheses at the end. **This goes for 99% of programming languages.**

Sometimes the function has extra _options_ and sometimes it doesn't:
```JS
jump()
sleep_in_hours(8)
colour_RGB(150, 255, 0)
print("I love to code!")
exit()
```

### Document vs. Code vs. Console

The **programmer** writes the `code`. This is invisible to the user.  
The **user** sees the `document`. This needs to be clear and easy to understand.  
The **programmer** needs to see output / errors that the **user** doesn't see. That's what the `console` is for.

**JavaScript** runs in the _background_ of a web browser (Safari, Chrome, Edge, Opera, etc). It can modify the `document` and it also has a `console`. **Try this**:
- Open a chrome browser window and visit www.brash.ca.  
- Press CTRL+SHIFT+J (Mac: OPTION+COMMAND+J).
  - This will be different for other browsers - if you aren't using Chrome, you're on your own.

It _should_ bring up the developer tools and it _should_ have highlighted the `console` tab. The `console` is like the brain of **JavaScript**. It takes commands and gives output. 

- Click into the console where you see a `>` chevron, this is the terminal (console) waiting for a command.
- Type `console.log("Hello World!")` and hit enter.
- Now try `console.log("Hello\nWorld!")` or `console.log("Hello\tWorld!")`
- You can also clear it with `console.clear()`

### Modifying the Document with JavaScript

The `document` (HTML) can be modified using **JavaScript** code!

Above we had to use `console.` and then a command We can do the same thing with `document.` (but the commands are different.)

- Go to the console and enter `document.write("Hello World!<br>I'm coding!")` ... see where the output goes.
- How about `document.title = "I am in control."`

  #### ❓ Why did that last one look different?

## JavaScript

Earlier we wrote the [Hello World! program](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%22Hello,_World!%22_program) together with `console.log()`.

The command `console.log()` is how we write **output** to the _**developer console**_. For words (characters) we need to use quotation marks:  `console.log(" ")` but for numbers we can just put the value: `console.log(3.14)`

We can also separate items with a comma (`,`) to print more than one thing. It will be separated by a _space_:
```JS
console.log("This","is","text.",15)    // Outputs:  This is text. 15
```

⛔️ Normal users don't see the console - this is a developer area.

## Special Characters & Escape Sequences
Most programming languages use some special commands for things like a new line or tab (indent). These are called **_escape sequences_** and we use a backslash `\` to "escape" them.

|Sequence|Usage|
|---|---|
|`\n`|Most common - used for a **new line**.|
|`\t`|Used to insert a _horizontal_ **tab** (indent)|
|`\v`|Used to insert a _vertical_ tab|
|`\'`|Used to insert a single-quote character (apostrophe)|
|`\"`|Used to insert a double-quote character|
|`\\`|Used to insert a blackslash character|

## Console.log( )
Remember that you need to use quotes if you want to print text. 
```JS
console.log("Line 1.\nThis is \"text\"");
```
Output:
```Text
Line 1.
This is "text"
```

Every time you use the `console.log( )` command, it automatically adds a new line (`\n`) at the end.




<br>

🐿️

<br>

---

<table style="width: 100%;">
  <tr>
    <td align="left"><a href="2.0 - Table of Contents.md">Table of contents</a></td>
    <td align="right"><a href="">2.2 - Variables</a></td>
  </tr>
</table>