###### ICS3U U2: JavaScript - Mr. Brash 🐿️

# 2.2 - Variables

Giving output is fairly easy with `console.log( )`. But what if we want to **_hold a value_** to be used later or for calculations?

Imagine tracking a `score`, maybe a `username`, or a bank balance.

> Don't feel like reading? [Watch this video](https://youtu.be/hmIxMwTBsO4).

_**Variables**_ hold values (numbers or letters) directly in the memory of the computer. We _reserve_ a block of memory space by _declaring_ our variable.

Here's an example from math class:  
> Let <b>w</b> represent the number of watermelons<br>
> Let <b>apple</b> represent the number of apples<br>
> w = 2<br>
> apples = 7<br>
> Let shoppingList = w + apples

### 🤔 In the example above, what is the value of `shoppingList`?

Using variables in JavaScript is _very_ similar:
```JS
let w = 2;                // You can set the value while declaring

let apples;               // Or declare first...
apples = 7;               // ...and set later

let qty = w + apples;  // sets the variable 'qty' to 9

console.log(qty);      // output the value of the 'qty' variable
```

**Note** - you might see the keyword `var` being used online instead of `let`. You should _always_ use `let` when creating a variable. If I see `var` in your work, I will probably assume you plagiarized / cheated.

After being _declared_, the variable can be used as much as you want. Think of it like a box, a bucket, or envelope.

### 🗒️ Quick Recap:
- To declare variables, we will use the **`let`** statement (similar to math class).
- We use the '**assignment**' operator (a single =) to _assign_ or _change_ the value.
- It is _**not**_ like algebra where left equals right, it is a _statement_ "x become 5"
- Variables can be reused, manipulated, and destroyed.

---

### Let's keep going:

Currently `w` is set to 2. If we want to change the value of `w` to 4 and then add 3 to it:
```JS
w = 4;
w = w + 3;
```

☝️ Notice we did _not_ use the keyword `let` every time, only when _declaring_ the variable.


## 💻 Try it:
- Go to your lesson 2.1 repo and open the code file `main.js`
- Declare a variable called `age` and make it equal to _your age in years_
- Now add a line to output the value of `age` to the console
- Preview the `index.html` page and check the console to see if it worked
---

### Variables can be different _types_ of data:
```JS
let myNumber = -45;
let myString = "Some text, in quotes";
let myBoolean = true;   // or false
```

### Text or Words are called "Strings"
Strings can be combined (concatenated) using the `+` operator
```JS
let myString;
myString = "This " + "and " + "that";    //  the value is now 'This and that'
```

Strings _cannot_ be subtracted!
```JS
myString = "This and that" - "that";   //  not possible
```

## 💻 Try it:
- Go back to the code file `main.js`
- Change your `age` output line to this: `console.log("I am " + age + " years old.")`
- Go to the console to see the output.

<hr>

### Booleans (true or false)
Not very helpful _right now_ but a variable can be `true` or `false` to help with logic
```JS
let homework = true;   // 1 or true
let tiktok = false;    // 0 or false
let someNumber = 5;    // considered true because it has value
let sample;            // considered false because it has no value
```

Need more help on variables?
[Tutorial on variables](https://javascript.info/variables) or [w3schools reference](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_variables.asp)


---

## Your Task

You will use your 2.1 repo to practice manipulating some variables. Just work below (after) your 2.1 work - don't delete it.

##### Part 1

1. Create a variable `length` and set it equal to 10
2. Create a variable `width` and set it equal to 5
3. Calculate the area of a rectangle using `length` and `width` - store the answer in a new variable `area`
<br>
**Note:** to multiply, use the asterisk symbol `*`  
**Example:**
    ```JS
    let x = 3;
    let answer = x * 4;   // This would be 12
    ```
4. Output the value of the `area` variable to the console.
5. Output the area again, but this time like this: `Area: 50`  {use the `area` variable for the number}

##### Part 2

1. Create a variable called `firstName` and set the value to "Santa".
2. Create a variable called `lastName` and set the value to "Claws".
3. On the next code line, set the value of `lastName` to "Claus" (to see that it changes).
4. Using the _variables_ you just made, print "I still believe in Santa Claus." to the console. Remember, I said _using the variables_.  
**Hint:**
    ```JS
    let first = "Mr.";
    let last = "Squirrel";
    console.log("His name is " + first " " + last);
    ```

##### Part 3

There is a way to print out the _type_ of a variable (just in case you needed to check). The keyword is `typeof` and it works like this:
```JS
console.log(typeof sideLength)
```

- Have JavaScript print out the _type_ of your `area` and `lastName` variables.

##### Part 4

_Variables_ are called that because they can change. But what if you don't want the variable to change - even by accident? Most programming languages have a special type of variable called a `constant`. These can be used for math and output, but they cannot be adjusted. The keyword for a _constant_ in JavaScript is `const`. Example:
```js
const e = 2.71828
```
1. Create a constant to represent π (3.14).
2. Create a variable for the _radius_ of a circle.
3. Calculate and output the area of the circle using your π constant and _radius_ variable.

<br>

🐿️

<br>

---

<table style="width: 100%;">
  <tr>
    <td align="left" valign="top"><a href="2.1 - Console vs Document.md">2.1 - Output & The Console</a></td>
    <td align="center"><a href="./2.0 - Table of Contents.md">Table of contents</a><br><br>(2.2 - Variables)</td>
    <td align="right" valign="top"><a href=""></a></td>
  </tr>
</table>