###### ICS3U U2: JavaScript - Mr. Brash 🐿️

# 2.3 - Mathematics

**If you missed the live demonstration in class, read below. Otherwise you can go straight to [your task](./YOUR_TASK.md).**

- Want to [watch a video](https://youtu.be/adReYfUPPoQ) instead?

### Mathematics in Code
The _symbols_ we use to do math are called **operators**.<br>
The list of _operators_ [is available here](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_operators.asp).
The list of _assignment operators_ [is available here](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_assignment.asp).

```JS
// Add, subtract, etc...
let x = 1;
x = x + 5;
x = 7 - 2;
x = x * 3;
x = 24 / 8;

// Exponent
let four_squared = 4**2;
let six_cubed = 6**3;

// Math Shortcuts
x = x + 3;
x += 3;   // Add 3 to x's current value

x = x - 2;
x -= 2;   // Reduce x's value by 2

x *= 4;   // Multiply 4 into the value of x
x /= 2;   // Divide x by 2 and store it back in x

// Incrementation (increase or decrease the variable by 1)
x++;
x--;

/* Anything in "quotes" is text (called a String)
 * We can combine (concatenate) strings */
let first = "Mr.";
let last = "Brash";
let myName = first + " " + last;      // The simple way

// It is NOT possible to subtract strings
myName = myName - "B";  // Not possible
```

### The Math Object
JavaScript has a special [Math object](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_math.asp) for doing complicated stuff.
- `Math.random()`  // Get a random decimal number bettwen 0 and 1
- `Math.round()`   // Round to the nearest whole value
- `Math.sqrt()`    // Take the square root of the number

### Examples:
```JS
// Calculate the area of a circle with radius of 3
let r = 3;
let area_circle = Math.PI * r**2;
```
```JS
// Calculate pythagorean theorem
let a = 8;
let b = 4;
let c = Math.sqrt(a**2 + b**2);
console.log(`The hypotenuse of a triangle with sides ${a} and ${b} is ${c}`)
```


# 📝 Your Task:

We are going to ask the computer to convert temperatures.

The equation to convert Fahrenheit to Celsius is:
> C = (F - 32) * 5/9

In the above equation, we _know_ the Fahrenheit value `F` and use it to create and store the new Celsius value into `C`.

The equation to convert in the _opposite_ direction is:
> F = (C * 9/5) + 32

#### We will use the code file [main.js](./main.js) and printing to the console to see our answers

**Part 1: Convert Celsius to Fahrenheit**
  1. Declare a variable and call it `celsius`, setting `celsius` to 100.
  2. Declare _another_ variable and call it `fahrenheit` - setting this variable to 0.
  3. Let's add 2 to `celsius`, just to practice that skill.
  4. Using the correct equation (above) and the value of the variable `celsius`, convert that temperature to degrees Fahrenheit and store the answer in your `fahrenheit` variable. This will overwrite the value of 0 you set in step 2.
  5. Output the value of `fahrenheit` to the console. Just the number.

**Part 2: Convert Fahrenheit to Celsius**
  This task will reuse the variables from Part 1 - *no* new `let` statements required.
  1. Now set `fahrenheit` to 77 
  2. Using the correct equation, convert from this Fahrenheit value to Celsius, and store the answer in the `celsius` variable.
  3. Output the current value of `celsius` to the console. Just the number.
  
**Part 3: Now for some text:**
  Printing just the numbers is boring. Let's try that output again (on a new line) but with some pizzazz!
  - Using the variables `fahrenheit` and `celsius` create an output that looks like this:  `{value} degrees Fahrenheit is {value} degrees celsius.` where {value} gets replaced by the appropriate numbers from your variables.

**Part 4: Slope**
  1. Slope of a line is defined as `m = (y2 - y1)/(x2 - x1)`. Define a variable `m` and compute the slope from point A(-4, 5) to point B(6, 0), and store it into `m`.
  2. Print the value of `m` to the console.

**Part 5: The Math object**
  Lets use the [Math object](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Math) a little to create a random volume of a cylinder. Reminder:  V = π r² h
  1. Create a random radius between 0 and 10
  2. Create a random height between 0 and 10
  3. Use `Math.PI` and `Math.round()` to calculate the volume of this cylinder.
  4. Output the volume of the cylinder as: `The volume of my random cylinder is {value}`


<br>

🕒 If you finish with class time left, you can do independent learning.

---

<table style="width: 100%;">
  <tr>
    <td align="left" valign="top"><a href="2.2 - Variables.md">2.2 - Variables</a></td>
    <td align="center"><a href="2.0 - Table of Contents.md">Table of contents</a><br><br>(2.3 - Mathematics)</td>
    <td align="right" valign="top"><a href=""></a>2.4 - Coming soon...</td>
  </tr>
</table>